Introduction

Good afternoon sir, thank you for taking out some of your precious time to listen to my
Presentation.

I would like to start off with the contents of this presentation.

Contents

Inspirations
What makes a racing game fun
Dislikes in the industry
Graphics and Environment
Gameplay Mechanics
Progression
Sound
UI
Platforms
Support & Payment Model
Preparation and Testing (Pre Alpha)
The title: Quick Shift


Inspirations

So, the game itself will be a 3D racer. It will incorporate key features from a number of racing games in the industry right now. The Crew, Need For Speed, Forza, Grid are the major inspirations behind this. Now all of these are triple A titles and they have some really big flaws, but regardless are the industry leaders. Now we can take this opportunity to learn from what they have already spent millions on.


What makes a racing game fun

I was reading a few research papers over the use of AI in the track & map generation in games and why such methods have not been yet implemented in racing games.
Although besides that there were a few things that did tell us about what makes a racing game fun based on the responses from a group of non expert individuals, or as we could call them, average joes. According to them what makes a racing game fun is 

-The sense of speed, feeling that you’re going fast. Now most of how these are achieved, I'll come back to them later.
-Driving endlessly on a straight track isn’t fun.
-Crashing all the time isn’t fun either, meaning, it’s a racing game, no matter how much we might think that adding more traffic will add more realism is fun, in reality it is not. Although if implemented correctly, with countermeasures included for the player to use to weave through the traffic would be fun.
-A good challenge, no rubberbanding, actual AI performance.
-Drifting is a fun mechanic, although if used too much can become a real annoyance really fast.
-Good tracks, with a good approach to the five essential metrics;
Race Line, Track Width, Camber, Clipping Points, Height Variation as mentioned in a research article


Dislikes in the industry

Now before we start understanding what the game will consist of and how it will play out, we need to learn some if not most of the things that the communities around racing games dislike.

The first culprit being the lack of content. Within the first few months of the release cycle, developers just abandon the game and soon after it becomes starved of content resulting in many unhappy players and just in general abandonment. The Crew 2 on the other hand, hasn’t done that and it churns out new content every week be it in the form of new cars or tracks or events. That has led it to have a consistent player base even after 4 years after its release.

Drifting, drift to steer became a really popular trend in racing games back in 2012-2015 and it was nice to have at first, but became a major annoyance for the players. Players wanted a choice of both grip and drift based handlings, just as too much of something becomes really annoying.

Limited car customization, a lot of players have had this problem with Forza games with the lack of customization options. What generally is offered in Forza games is one body kit and that’s it, nothing to give your car a personal touch.

Lack of lore or story. I have noticed that many racing games that lack a storyline be it as simple as explaining how to work your way around the game or just in general as to why you’re there racing in the first place have been the most likely ones to be forgotten early on. Forza has its own music festival which is the reason why you race in that game. Every need for speed game has had a story even though people didn’t like them, but still the player base stuck with them longer.



Graphics & Environment

Some of the inspirations for this game in terms of graphics & environment are 'art of rally' for its art style, 'The Crew 2' for it's brilliant and vibrant UI, 'Need for Speed ProStreet', 'Assetto Corsa' for some of its track design  and 'Forza Motorsport' for some of it’s gameplay.





Gameplay Mechanics

The gameplay mechanics will be the same as any other racing title to date, follow the road, first to the finish wins. But besides the game will contain car customization, a full day and night cycle, damage on collision, drifting and one of the most important one’s would be online leaderboards and multiplayer. We would also include special events as seen in Forza Horizon series with hot wheels race tracks and racing against trains and fighter jets. Along with The Crew 2 which consists of events such as stunt driving and so on and so forth with their own story behind each event. Now another thing following all of these will be adding different event types. Circuit races, Endurance races, Championships and Drag races with their own separate tracks along with story events similar to Need For Speed ProStreet. The game will also consist of a system where the players can choose to transform their car’s handling according to their desired play style whether it be grip or drift upor a sweet spot in the middle, this will be achieved with a system of switching car performance parts and tweaking their parts such as tyre pressure. The higher the pressure, the more grip loss and more drift; the lower pressure, more grip and lower drift. Similar to what Forza does, but since we’re on a smaller scale arcade game, we can keep it simple to just using sliders and not values. 

Now with all of this there will be certain special event types that would be different than the usual race events. What I mean by that is that we will have events such as what we saw in Watch Dogs where we had to mow down hoards of zombies with our car and score points. Along with it we can add Blur inspired races, using power ups to win races.

There will be team races with different powers for each team member that participates in the race with the player, something similar to what Juiced and Need For Speed Carbon offers.

Multiplayer is absolutely key to making the game feel alive. In the past decade, every single top rated racing game has come out with online multiplayer. Players in this genre love to challenge real life players, it gives the players a sense of dominance against the others. This all comes from watching movies from the racing genre, it makes the players feel badass. Playing against the computer is a thing of the past, people want a real challenge against other players.


Progression

Adding a good progression system with a risk for reward system is key to keeping the player entertained. An intuitive way of earning experience and money in game. It is one of the things Need For Speed Heat has been known for, the game offered earning experience by racing during the night which increased the risk of getting into a police pursuit, the higher the heat level rises, the more the player gains exp for it, but if the player gets caught, all of that exp is gone. That’s what keeps the players on edge, the edge is what keeps the player going. So setting up events types that provide exp with a risk for reward mechanic is what we need. We need to make the players feel like they are rising from the bottom to the top, that’s what brings satisfaction and makes the player want to achieve higher and higher. Now this could be done in the way the player earns money, car parts, or even cars.

As for the story, the game will follow a story of an established racer, who lost his career after an accident, none of the teams in the racing scene wanted him anymore and then he tries to build his own crew, racing as a lone wolf and gathering people to join him along and race the leaderboards to the top. There will be competition and enemies that will 0try their best to put hurdles in the players path.

Now in the beginning there will only be non team races, but after a certain amount of exp, the players will get their first crew member which will then unlock team races, and later on as the crew gets bigger, the player can unlock more team related races and championships. Each crew member will have a special ability, be it drafting, or repairing your car on the fly, now this is an arcade racer, so we can let our imagination fly sky high.

The way the player can earn exp is by competing certain milestones or challenges within the races or any other event type.

Sound

Sound design is of utmost importance. Many well known studios like ghost games and even indie studios alike pay close attention to the audio. Audio defines the quality of your product, even if you spend millions on vfx for a movie, if the audio is subpar, that will make the whole movie feel subpar. 

A lot of artists I have met and scene even on YouTube and all the online platforms stress over sound design. Now we don't have to be pin point accurate with sound design for engines and tyre screeches since it's an arcade game, but we have to pay attention to the sound as well.

Now there a couple audio middleware softwares that will allow us to pull this off for example audiokinetic's wwise and fmod, these have been used in games such as need for speed and multiple other indie titles.

Wwise even has a unity integration plugin.



UI

Simplicity is key. Less is more as said by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. The simpler and cleaner looking UI, the more elegance it will bring to our project. The UI will carry all the key elements while staying unintrusive to the player, one good example for this is Grid Autosport for android. The game carried over all the important ui elements from the console versions and shrunk them down into mobile friendly configurations. The buttons that had text on, now had a custom thumbnail to represent the message of each of the buttons.

This kept the game looking elegant while serving every feature from the consoles


Platforms

Although platforms will be a much shorter section than the rest, it is equally as important. The game will be first tested in house, and then will be rolled out for closed beta testing. Any user feedback will be gone over and be contemplated if it would be possible to do so. After closed beta testing the game will be released in early access for a month and any user feedback will be noted. With live updates the game will get patched for any remaining bugs or feature additions.

The game will first roll out on Android, it would be used as a test bench in a way as well. If the game sees critical success, it will be then ported over to consoles and the PC. For PC, most notably Steam and Epic Games Store.

Support & Payment Model

This is one of the most crucial sections in this whole presentation. This will be the key to getting positive attention towards the studio and maximizing profits. For this section I will use The Crew 2 as the leading example. The Crew 2 has received the best press when it comes to it's payment model. The game offers free dlc forever, the main method the way The Crew 2 makes its profits is by selling vanity items, something exactly like fortnite, but never before done in a game from this genre. The game was 60 USD at launch and rightly so for its scale, it offered bikes, cars, boats, planes, hovercrafts, cars with discipline for off roads, tracks and streets.

But since we are on a smaller scale, we can have the price lower after the early access, during and before which the game will be free to try. Post launch we will roll out free content updates with new cars and tracks and environments.

This is exactly what other studios have not done and this is exactly what the crew 2 was praised and other games were frowned upon.
